---
layout: post
title:  Earn A Gamification Badge with Merit (Part 1)
tags: [professional]
---

I first came across the [Merit gem](https://github.com/merit-gem/merit) while I was working on [Weather Clever](http://www.weatherclever.com), a Rails app. I wanted my user community to [earn badges and gain points](http://www.weatherclever.com/reputation) when they interacted with my application. Being a developer, I was sure I could roll my own solution but I decided to do some digging on what was already available.  After a [little research](https://www.ruby-toolbox.com/categories/Reputation_Engines), Merit was the best options for this type of gamification in a Rails app.

### Getting started
Merit is fairly straight forward to install in a new application or an existing application. Merit's [README](https://github.com/merit-gem/merit#installation) provides the six steps to getting started.

* Add `gem 'merit'` to your Gemfile, then `bundle`
* Install via `rails g merit:install`
* Tell Merit which model you want to "have merit", this is normally your User model: `rails g merit MODEL_NAME`
* Merit requires several tables to operate, so run `rake db:migrate`

At this point you are ready to start using Merit.

### How it works
Merit provided the infrastructure for Badges, Points and Rankings. All of these objects can be assigned manually or triggered from certain actions in your application which you define via rules. The two key locations for Merit are the initializer file (`config/initializers/merit`) where you configure the application, and define badges, and the rules, located at `app/models/merit/`.

#### Badges
Merit Badges are defined in an initializer and are non-database objects, accessible in your app via `Merit::Badge`. Merit uses a gem called Ambry to achieve this, but beware that many Active Record model behavior is not available. Merit recommends using the location `config/initializers/merit.rb` to define these behaviors. For example:

{% highlight ruby %}
# config/initializers/merit.rb

Merit::Badge.create!(
  id: 1,
  name: "pioneer",
  description: "One of the first 100 members",
)
{% endhighlight %}

Badges can be assigned manually (`User.first.add_badge(1)`) or via rules which are defined on a controller#action level:

{% highlight ruby %}
# app/models/merit/badge_rules.rb

# Basic, you voted, you get a badge
grant_on 'phrase_votes#create', badge: 'judgemental'

# More complex, has a block to ensure you have 10 votes before you are 'liked'
grant_on 'phrase_votes#create', badge: 'liked', to: :phrase_user do |vote|
  vote.phrase_user.phrase_vote_rep > 10
end

# Even more complex, gives a level specific badge if a condition is met. 
# It is important that these are mutually exclusive if you want only one badge leve at a time
grant_on 'current_conditions#create', badge: 'meteorologist', level: 1 do |current_condition|
  current_condition.user && current_condition.user.current_conditions.count == 1
end
{% endhighlight %}

For a real world example, take a look at the [full Badge rule set](https://github.com/pete2786/mnw-rails4/blob/master/app/models/merit/badge_rules.rb) used by Weather Clever.

#### Points
The points in merit are attached to any object in your application, however they default to the User model. I have found it can be a bit clunky to use other models with the `score` method provided by Merit. A have three example use cases below

{% highlight ruby %}
# app/models/merit/point_rules.rb

score 1, on: 'phrase_votes#create', to: :user
score 5, on: 'phrase_votes#create', to: :phrase_user
{% endhighlight %}

As with badges, you can manually define callbacks in the models to handle complex point assignment if the DSL does not get the job done.

#### Rankings
The rankings in Merit are similar to what you might expect in the army. Higher is better. You provide a set of object via amodel or scope to identify the eligible records for a change in rank, then provide a block which should return true if the object can "level up".

{% highlight ruby %}
# app/models/merit/rank_rules.rb

set_rank level: 2, to: Contibuter do |contributer|
  committer.likes >= 10
end
{% endhighlight %}

These have to be scheduled via cron, so the configuration complexity is slightly higher than Points or Badges. I would recommend skipping the Ranking system, as it seems like a bolt on feature when compared to Badges.

### Wrapping it up

Gamification with Merit makes a fantastic addition to your application. It works equally well when starting from scratch or bolting on to an existing application. Expect to have basic badges and points working in your application in a few hours. I'm planning another two parts on solutions and workarounds I have implemented to improve upon the interfaces provided by Merit. Specifically easier interactions with Badges, defining rules outside of the DSL and using their Observer to send notifications.

